# Practical_Machine_Learning_Project

##Background
Using devices such as Jawbone Up, Nike FuelBand, and Fitbit it is now possible to collect a large amount of data about personal activity relatively inexpensively. These type of devices are part of the quantified self movement - a group of enthusiasts who take measurements about themselves regularly to improve their health, to find patterns in their behavior, or because they are tech geeks. One thing that people regularly do is quantify how much of a particular activity they do, but they rarely quantify how well they do it.

Barbell lifts were performed by six participants. Each participant attempted the barbell lift in five different ways: according to specification, i.e., correct method (Class A), throwing the elbow to the front (Class B), lifting the dumbbell only halfway (Class C), lowering the dumbbell only halfway (Class D), and throwing the hips to the front (Class E). Classes B to E are incorrect ways of performing the left. Data is generated by accelerometers on the belt, forearm, arm, and dumbbell of each participant as they perform the lifts. Each measurement was made 10 times. More information is available from the website here: http://groupware.les.inf.puc-rio.br/har[1] (see the section on the Weight Lifting Exercise Dataset).

##Objective
The goal of your project is to predict the manner in which the participants performed the exercise. This is the “classe” variable in the training set. You may use any of the other variables to predict with. You should create a report describing how you built your model, how you used cross validation, what you think the expected out of sample error is, and why you made the choices you did. You will also use your prediction model to predict 20 different test cases.

## Analysis

The RMarkdown document index1.Rmd contains the analysis. 
The pdf file index.pdf contains the results